[nrfconnect] Added a guide on configuration factory data (#22)
ArekBalysNordic/connectedhomeip: docs/guides/nrfconnect_factory_data_configuration.md

  <img src="../../examples/platform/nrfconnect/doc/images/nRF52840-DK-small.png" alt="nRF52840 DK">
</p>

<hr>
This document is based on [Matter](https://github.com/project-chip/connectedhomeip), and Nordic
Semiconductor's nRF Connect SDK, and supports creating factory data.

-   [Overview](#overview)
    -   [Factory data components](#factory-data-components)
    -   [Factory data format](#factory-data-format)
-   [Generating factory data](#generating-factory-data)
    -   [Creating factory data JSON file](#creating-factory-data-json-file)
    -   [Verifying using a JSON schema](#verifying-using-a-json-schema)
    -   [Preparing factory data partition on a device](#preparing-factory-data-partition-on-a-device)
    -   [Generating factory data partition](#generating-factory-data-partition)
-   [Building an example with factory data](#building-an-example-with-factory-data)
-   [Programming factory data](#programming-factory-data)

<hr>

<a name="overview"></a>

## Overview

The factory data parameter set includes information such as a manufacturer name, date of manufacturing, product certifications, and PCB versioning. 

> On the nRF connect devices, factory data is stored in the Flash memory in a separate partition. This help keep this partition secure by applying non-writable attribute and encryption. Parameters are read at the boot time of a device, and then they can be used in the Matter stack and user application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the nRF Connect platform, factory data is stored by default in the internal Flash memory in a separate partition. This helps to keep factory partition secure by applying hardware protection. Parameters are read at the boot time of a device, and then they can be used in the Matter stack and user application.
```

|**`spake2_verifier`**|`SPAKE2 Verifier`| 97 B|*hex string*|mandatory|The spake 2 verifier generated using default SPAKE2 salt, iteration count and passcode. This value can be used for development or testing purposes.|
|**`discriminator`**|`Discriminator`| 2 B|*uint16*|mandatory|A 12-bit value matching the field of the same name in the setup code. Discriminator is used during a discovery process.|
|**`passcode`**|`SPAKE passcode`|4 B|*uint32*|optional|A pairing passcode is a 27-bit unsigned integer which serves as a proof of possession during commissioning. Its value shall be restricted to the values 0x0000001 to 0x5F5E0FE (00000001 to 99999998 in decimal), excluding the invalid Passcode values: 00000000, 11111111, 22222222, 33333333, 44444444, 55555555, 66666666, 77777777, 88888888, 99999999, 12345678, 87654321|
|**`user`**|`User data`| variable|*JSON string*|max 1024 B|The user data is provided in JSON format. This parameter is optional and depends on user/manufacturer purpose. It is getting as a string from persistent storage and then should be parsed in a user application. This data is not used in the Matter stack.|

### Factory data format

> The Factory data set is kept in JSON format that is regulated by [JSON Schema](https://github.com/project-chip/connectedhomeip/blob/master/scripts/tools/nrfconnect/nrfconnect_factory_data.schema) file. All parameters are divided between `mandatory `and `optional.` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Factory data is represented by JSON format that is regulated by [JSON Schema](https://github.com/project-chip/connectedhomeip/blob/master/scripts/tools/nrfconnect/nrfconnect_factory_data.schema) file. All parameters are divided between `mandatory `and `optional.` 
```

> - `Mandatory` parameters must be provided because, without them, the device will not be able to perform commissioning to the Matter network. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Mandatory` parameters must be provided as they are required e.g. to perform commissioning to the Matter network. 
```

> - `Optional` parameters can be used for development and testing purposes. A `user` data parameter can consist of all data needed by a specific manufacturer that is not included in mandatory parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Optional` parameters may be used for development and testing purposes. A `user` data parameter can consist of all data needed by a specific manufacturer that is not included in mandatory parameters.
```

> In the factory data set, there are some of the formats used. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the factory data set, the following formats are used:
```

> - `uint16` and `uint32` are the numeric formats representing respectively two-bytes length unsigned integer and four-bytes length unsigned integer.

Reviewer: What about endianness?

- `hex string` meaning the bytes in hexadecimal representation given in a string. An prefix `hex:` is added to parameter to mark that is a `hex string`. E.g. an ASCII string *abba* is represented as *hex:61626261*, and its length is two times greater than ASCII string plus length of prefix. 

> - `ASCII string` is a string representation in ASCII encoding.

Reviewer: Is it null terminated?

- `ISO 8601` format is a [date format](https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html) which represents a date given as YYYY-MM-DD or YYYYMMDD.
- All certificates stored in factory data are given in [X.509](https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-X.509-201910-I/en) format.

<hr>
<a name="Generating factory data"></a>

## Generating factory data

### Creating factory data JSON file

### Verifying using a JSON schema

> Ready JSON file containing factory data can be verified using prepared [JSON Schema](https://github.com/project-chip/connectedhomeip/blob/master/scripts/tools/nrfconnect/nrfconnect_factory_data.schema). JSON Schema is a tool for validating the structure of JSON data. For this purpose, checking the correctness of given factory data is helpful. First, JSON Schema contains a list of mandatory parameters that must be stored in factory data. Missing at least one mandatory parameter will cause a checking error. Then, each parameter is checked according to the given pattern in the second phase of Schema work. The process of validating factory data JSON files is optional, but it can help avoid problems with reading parameters by Matter Device so it is strongly recommended to verify a newly created JSON file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ready JSON file containing factory data can be verified using [JSON Schema tool](https://github.com/project-chip/connectedhomeip/blob/master/scripts/tools/nrfconnect/nrfconnect_factory_data.schema). JSON Schema is a tool for validating the structure and content of JSON data. User should validate factory data JSON file.
```

To check JSON file using JSON Schema manually on Linux machine install *php-json-schema* package:
```
$ sudo apt install php-json-schema
```

And use following command:
```
$ validate-json <path_to_JSON_file> <path_to_schema_file>
```

> If in the console there are not any outputs, it means that JSON is correct.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Script returns empty output in case of success.
```

# Configuring factory data for nRF Connect examples

> Factory data is a set of parameters written to flash by a device's manufacturer during the manufacturing process. All of them are written to the non-volatile memory (persistent storage) of microcontroller storage and are protected against rewriting by the software. These parameters should be the same during the whole lifetime of a device, and they can be replaced only by reflashing the entire device using a programmer. 

Author: Oh ok, thanks! I forgot about it.

> Factory data is a set of parameters written to flash by a device's manufacturer during the manufacturing process. All of them are written to the non-volatile memory (persistent storage) of microcontroller storage and are protected against rewriting by the software. These parameters should be the same during the whole lifetime of a device, and they can be replaced only by reflashing the entire device using a programmer. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Factory data is a set of device's parameters written to a non-volatile memory during the manufacturing process. All of them are immutable i.e. they are protected against modifications by the software. These parameters meant to be the same during the whole lifetime of a device and preserves factory resets. Factory data can be replaced only by reprogramming the entire device using a programmer. 
```

-   [Overview](#overview)
    -   [Factory data components](#factory-data-components)
    -   [Factory data format](#factory-data-format)
-   [Using own factory data](#using-own-factory-data)
-   [Generating factory data](#generating-factory-data)
    -   [Creating factory data JSON file](#creating-factory-data-json-file)
    -   [Verifying using a JSON schema](#verifying-using-a-json-schema)
    -   [Preparing factory data partition on a device](#preparing-factory-data-partition-on-a-device)
    -   [Generating factory data partition](#generating-factory-data-partition)
-   [Building an example with factory data](#building-an-example-with-factory-data)
    -   [Providing factory data parameters as a build argument list](#providing-factory-data-parameters-as-a-build-argument-list)
    - [Setting factory data parameters using interactive Kconfig interfaces](#setting-factory-data-parameters-using-interactive-kconfig-interfaces)
-   [Programming factory data](#programming-factory-data)

<hr>

<a name="overview"></a>

## Overview

The factory data parameter set includes information such as a manufacturer name, date of manufacturing, product certifications, and PCB versioning. 

> For the nRF Connect platform, factory data is stored by default in the internal Flash memory in a separate partition. This helps to keep factory partition secure by applying hardware protection. Parameters are read at the boot time of a device, and then they can be used in the Matter stack and user application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the nRF Connect platform, the factory data is stored by default in a separate partition of the internal flash memory. This helps to keep the factory data secure by applying hardware write protection. Parameters are read at the boot time of a device, and then they can be used in the Matter stack and user application.
```

A factory data set consists of following parameters:

|Key name|Full name|Length|Format|Conformance|Description|
|:------:|:-------:|:----:|:----:|:---------:|:---------:|
|**`sn`**|`serial number`|<1, 32> B|*ASCII string*|mandatory|A serial number parameter defines an unique number of manufactured device. Maximum length of serial number is 32 characters.|

> |**`vendor_id`**|`vendor ID`|2 B|*uint16*|mandatory|A CHIP-assigned id for the organization responsible for producing the device.|

Reviewer 3: Doesn't CHIP here stand for obsolete Connected Home over IP name? We should not use it anymore.

> |**`product_id`**|`product ID`|2 B|*uint16*|mandatory|A unique id assigned by the device vendor to identify the product or device type. Defaults to a CHIP-assigned id designating a non-production or test "product".|

Reviewer 3: Same here, don't use CHIP name.

> |**`vendor_name`**|`vendor name`|<1, 32> B|*ASCII string*|mandatory|A human-readable vendor name which provides a simple string containing identification of device's vendor for the Content APP.|

Reviewer 3: I would explain somewhere what is Content APP, or rephrase it, as this term may not be obvious for a user.

|**`sn`**|`serial number`|<1, 32> B|*ASCII string*|mandatory|A serial number parameter defines an unique number of manufactured device. Maximum length of serial number is 32 characters.|

> |**`vendor_id`**|`vendor ID`|2 B|*uint16*|mandatory|A MATTER-assigned id for the organization responsible for producing the device.|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|**`vendor_id`**|`vendor ID`|2 B|*uint16*|mandatory|A CSA-assigned id for the organization responsible for producing the device.|
```

> |**`product_id`**|`product ID`|2 B|*uint16*|mandatory|A unique id assigned by the device vendor to identify the product or device type. Defaults to a MATTER-assigned id designating a non-production or test "product".|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|**`product_id`**|`product ID`|2 B|*uint16*|mandatory|A unique id assigned by the device vendor to identify the product. Defaults to a MATTER-assigned id designating a non-production or test "product".|
```
"Device type" has a special meaning in the context of Matter so better not to confuse those two things.

|**`hw_ver_str`**|`hardware version string`|<1, 64> B|*uint16*|mandatory|A hardware version string parameter specifies the version of the hardware of the device as a more user-friendly value than that presented by the hardware version integer value. The meaning of its value, and the versioning scheme, are vendor defined.|

> |**`rd_uid`**|`rotating device ID unique ID`|<20, 36> B|*hex string*|mandatory|The rotating device ID unique ID consists of a randomly-generated 128-bit or longer octet string. This parameter should be protected against reading or writing over the air after initial introduction into the device, and stay fixed during the lifetime of the device. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
|**`rd_uid`**|`rotating device ID unique ID`|<20, 36> B|*hex string*|mandatory|The unique ID for rotating device ID consists of a randomly-generated 128-bit or longer octet string. This parameter should be protected against reading or writing over the air after initial introduction into the device, and stay fixed during the lifetime of the device. |
```

> |**`dac_cert`**|`(DAC) Device Attestation Certificate`|<1, 1204> B|*hex string*|mandatory|All commissionable Matter Nodes SHALL include a Device Attestation Certificate (DAC) and corresponding private key, unique to that Device. The DAC is used in the Device Attestation process, as part of Commissioning a Commissionee into a Fabric. The DAC is a DER-encoded X.509v3-compliant certificate as defined in RFC 5280.|

Reviewer 3: @greg-fer significant part of this description is a copy-paste from the Matter spec. Are we allowed to do that, or should we cite it, as a part of external document?

Author: Hmm, Apart from that, it's from Matter spec, I realized that it could be incomprehensible for users in this form.

|**`hw_ver`**|`hardware version`|2 B|*uint16*|mandatory|A hardware version number specifies the version number of the hardware of the device. The meaning of its value, and the versioning scheme, are vendor defined.|
|**`hw_ver_str`**|`hardware version string`|<1, 64> B|*uint16*|mandatory|A hardware version string parameter specifies the version of the hardware of the device as a more user-friendly value than that presented by the hardware version integer value. The meaning of its value, and the versioning scheme, are vendor defined.|

> |**`rd_uid`**|`rotating device ID unique ID`|<20, 36> B|*hex string*|mandatory|The unique ID for rotating device ID consists of a randomly-generated 128-bit or longer octet string. This parameter should be protected against reading or writing over the air after initial introduction into the device, and stay fixed during the lifetime of the device.|

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we should use *hex string* as a type. On the device it's stored as *byte string* and is only encoded as *hex string* in a JSON file (due to JSON format limitations).

Author: Hmm, ok If we decided to inform users about the possibility of creating their factory data accessor, we should put here types that describe values in the final hex file.

|**`dac_cert`**|`(DAC) Device Attestation Certificate`|<1, 1204> B|*hex string*|mandatory|The Device Attestation Certificate (DAC) and corresponding private key, are unique to each Matter Device. The DAC is used for the Device Attestation process, and to perform commissioning into a Fabric. The DAC is a DER-encoded X.509v3-compliant certificate as defined in RFC 5280.|
|**`dac_key`**|`DAC private key`|68 B|*hex string*|mandatory|The Private key associated with the Device Attestation Certificate (DAC). This key should be encrypted, and maximum security should be guaranteed while generating and providing it to factory data.|

> |**`pai_cert`**|`Product Attestation Intermediate`|<1, 1204> B|*hex string*|mandatory|An intermediate certificate is an X.509 certificate, which has been signed by the root certificate. The last intermediate certificate in a chain is used to sign the leaf (the Matter device) certificate.|

Reviewer 2: DER-encoded

|**`passcode`**|`SPAKE passcode`|4 B|*uint32*|optional|A pairing passcode is a 27-bit unsigned integer which serves as a proof of possession during commissioning. Its value shall be restricted to the values 0x0000001 to 0x5F5E0FE (00000001 to 99999998 in decimal), excluding the invalid Passcode values: 00000000, 11111111, 22222222, 33333333, 44444444, 55555555, 66666666, 77777777, 88888888, 99999999, 12345678, 87654321|

> |**`user`**|`User data`| variable|*JSON string*|optional|The user data provided in |

Reviewer 3: Provided in ... what?

Reviewer 3: Btw. I think we should assume some maximum size of this user data.

### Factory data format

> The Factory data set is keep in JSON format that is regulated by [JSON Schema](https://github.com/project-chip/connectedhomeip/blob/master/scripts/tools/nrfconnect/nrfconnect_factory_data.schema) file. All parameters are divided between `mandatory `and `optional.` 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Factory data set is kept in JSON format that is regulated by [JSON Schema](https://github.com/project-chip/connectedhomeip/blob/master/scripts/tools/nrfconnect/nrfconnect_factory_data.schema) file. All parameters are divided between `mandatory `and `optional.` 
```

### Factory data format

> The Factory data set is represented by JSON format that is regulated by [JSON Schema](https://github.com/project-chip/connectedhomeip/blob/master/scripts/tools/nrfconnect/nrfconnect_factory_data.schema) file. All parameters are divided between `mandatory `and `optional.` 

Reviewer 2: I would this section to describe the factory data format on a device, not only its intermediate representation. I think it's worth adding a sentence that the factory data is stored on a device in the CBOR format, but the JSON format is used as an intermediate, human-readable representation of the data.

To check JSON file using JSON Schema manually on Linux machine install *php-json-schema* package:
```
$ sudo apt install php-json-schema
```

And use following command:
```
$ validate-json <path_to_JSON_file> <path_to_schema_file>
```

If in the console there are not any outputs, it means that JSON is correct.

JSON file can be checked automatically by the python script during its generation by given a path to JSON schema file as an additional argument:
```
$ python generate_nrfconnect_chip_factory_data.py --schema <path_to_schema>
```

> Note: This [website](https://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/) can help better understand JSON schema. 

### Preparing factory data partition on a device

> The factory data partition is an area in a device's persistent storage where a factory data set is stored. This area is configured using the [Partition Manager](https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/nrf/scripts/partition_manager/partition_manager.html), within which all partitions are declared by writing the `pm_static.yaml` file. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The factory data partition is an area in a device's persistent storage where a factory data set is stored. This area is configured using the [Partition Manager](https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/nrf/scripts/partition_manager/partition_manager.html), within which all partitions are declared by writing the `pm_static.yml` file. 
```

> Partitions and their sizes may be different according to different nRFconnect boards. Each nrfconnect board that the example supports contains a `pm_static.yaml` file in "*connectedhomeip/examples/< example_name >/nrfconnect/configuration/< pcb name >*" directory. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Partitions and their sizes may be different according to different nRF Connect boards. Each nRF Connect board that the example supports contains a `pm_static.yml` file in "*connectedhomeip/examples/< example_name >/nrfconnect/configuration/< pcb name >*" directory. 
```

> To prepare an example to support a factory data pm_static file has to contain a partition named `factory_data`, and Its size should be equal to at least 4 kB and be multiple of one flash page (for nrf52 and nrf53 boards, a single page is 4 kB length).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To prepare an example that supports a factory data, pm_static file has to contain a partition named `factory_data`, and its size should be equal to at least 4 kB and be multiple of one flash page (for nRF52 and nRF53 boards, a single page is 4 kB size).
```

> Below, there is an example of how to create a factory data partition in pm_static.yaml file according to pm_static.yaml from [lock app example](../../examples/lock-app/nrfconnect/configuration/nrf52840dk_nrf52840/pm_static_dfu.yml) and nRF52840DK board:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Below, there is an example of how to create a factory data partition in pm_static.yml file according to pm_static.yml from [lock app example](../../examples/lock-app/nrfconnect/configuration/nrf52840dk_nrf52840/pm_static_dfu.yml) and nRF52840DK board:
```

```
...
mcuboot_primary_app:
    orig_span: &id002
        - app
    span: *id002
    address: 0x7200
    size: 0xf3e00

factory_data:
    address: 0xfb00
    size: 0x1000
    region: flash_primary

settings_storage:
    address: 0xfc000
    size: 0x4000
    region: flash_primary
...
```

> In this example, a `factory_data` partition has been placed after the application partition(mcuboot_primary_app is a container to store application firmware which can be replaced in the Direct Firmware Update process), and its size has been set to 4 kB (0x1000) which corresponds to one page of nrf52840 flash memory.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this example, a `factory_data` partition has been placed after the application partition(mcuboot_primary_app is a container to store application firmware which can be replaced in the Direct Firmware Update process), and its size has been set to 4 kB (0x1000) which corresponds to one page of nRF52840 flash memory.
```

> Check a partition allocation using the `west` build system to ensure that the partition was appropriately created. Below there is a partition manager report output generated according to an example:

Reviewer 3: Please add information that this command should be invoked in the example's directory.

To generate factory data partition using [python script](../../scripts/tools/nrfconnect/nrfconnect_generate_partition.py) use the following command pattern:

```
$ python nrfconnect_generate_partition.py -i <path_to_JSON_file> -o <path_to_output> --offset <partition_address_in_memory> --size <partition_size> 
```
In this command:

- <path_to_JSON_file> is a path to JSON file containing appropriate factory data.
- <path_to_output> is a path to an output file without any prefix. E.g. By providing here */build/output* as an argument, as a result */build/output.hex* and */build/output.bin* files will be created.
- <partition_address_in_memory> is an address in the device's persistent storage area where a partition data set should be stored.
- <partition_size> is a size of partition in the device's persistent storage area. This value will be checked according to JSON data to check if new data fits this size.

To see optional arguments for the script use the following command:
``` 
$ python nrfconnect_generate_partition.py -h
```

> **Example of command for nrf52840DK**:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Example of command for nRF52840DK**:
```

```
$ python nrfconnect_generate_partition.py -i build/zephyr/factory_data.json -o build/zephyr/factory_data --offset 0xfb000 --size 0x1000
```

As a result a *factory_data.hex* and *factory_data.bin* files will be created in */build/zephyr/* directory. The first contains memory offset; therefore, it can be flashed directly to the device using a programmer (E.g. nrfjprog).

<hr>
<a name="Building an example with factory data"></a>

## Building an example with factory data

> Generating factory data set can be done manually using instructions described in [Generating factory data](#generating-factory-data) topic. But there is another way to generate factory data. Inside the nrfconnect build system, there is a script that generates factory data automatically using kConfigs and merges it to the firmware .hex file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Generating factory data set can be done manually using instructions described in [Generating factory data](#generating-factory-data) topic. But there is another way to generate factory data. Inside the nRF Connect build system, there is a script that generates factory data automatically using kConfigs and merges it to the firmware .hex file.
```

To enable generating factory data set automatically build an example with the following option:
```

> $ west build -b nrf52840dk_nrf52840 -- --DCHIP_FACTORY_DATA_BUILD=y

Reviewer 3: It should be -- -DCONFIG_CHIP_FACTORY_DATA_BUILD=y

```

> or add `CHIP_FACTORY_DATA_BUILD=y` config to a ***prj.conf*** file.

Reviewer 3: Same here, add CONFIG_

> Each factory data parameter has default value and they are described in [Kconfig file](../../config/nrfconnect/chip-module/Kconfig). Setting a new value for factory data parameter can be done in two ways - by providing it as a build argument list or by using interactive Kconfig interfaces.

Reviewer 3: We have a md file that describes how to configure kconfig options, so we can refer to that here, instead of describing how to change it.

Author: Do you think I should delete the config view from this documentation? I think it is suitable for a user to be sure that they look at the proper window.

### Providing factory data parameters as a build argument list

This solution of providing factory data can be used with third-party build script because it uses only one command.
All parameters can be edited manually by providing them as an additional option for the west command e.g.:

```

> $ west build -b nrf52840dk_nrf52840 -- --DCHIP_FACTORY_DATA_BUILD=y --DCHIP_DEVICE_DISCRIMINATOR=0xF11

Reviewer 3: Please verify in all commands in this file that:
1. You pass configs with single - and not -- in the command
2. Every one of them has CONFIG_ prefix

### Creating factory data JSON file

### Verifying using a JSON schema

Ready JSON file containing factory data can be verified using prepared [JSON Schema](https://github.com/project-chip/connectedhomeip/blob/master/scripts/tools/nrfconnect/nrfconnect_factory_data.schema). JSON Schema is a tool for validating the structure of JSON data. For this purpose, checking the correctness of given factory data is helpful. First, JSON Schema contains a list of mandatory parameters that must be stored in factory data. Missing at least one mandatory parameter will cause a checking error. Then, each parameter is checked according to the given pattern in the second phase of Schema work. The process of validating factory data JSON files is optional, but it can help avoid problems with reading parameters by Matter Device so it is strongly recommended to verify a newly created JSON file.

To check JSON file using JSON Schema manually on Linux machine install *php-json-schema* package:
```
$ sudo apt install php-json-schema
```

And use following command:
```
$ validate-json <path_to_JSON_file> <path_to_schema_file>
```

If in the console there are not any outputs, it means that JSON is correct.

> JSON file can be checked automatically by the python script during its generation by given a path to JSON schema file as an additional argument:

Reviewer: Hmm, so why we are recommending above 3rd party tool?

Author: I guess, in some cases, customers may don't want to use our python script to generate JSON but only use a partition creator. So I tried to point out that it can be done in some ways. Do you think we should force here validating JSON only by our script?

```
$ python generate_nrfconnect_chip_factory_data.py --schema <path_to_schema>
```

> > Note: This [website](https://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/) can help better understand JSON schema. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: To learn more about JSON scheme, check this [website](https://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/). 
```

### Preparing factory data partition on a device

> The factory data partition is an area in a device's persistent storage where a factory data set is stored. This area is configured using the [Partition Manager](https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/nrf/scripts/partition_manager/partition_manager.html), within which all partitions are declared by writing the `pm_static.yml` file. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The factory data partition is an area in a device's persistent storage where a factory data set is stored. This area is configured using the [Partition Manager](https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/nrf/scripts/partition_manager/partition_manager.html), within which all partitions are declared in the `pm_static.yml` file. 
```

> Partitions and their sizes may be different according to different nRF Connect boards. Each nRF Connect board that the example supports contains a `pm_static.yml` file in "*connectedhomeip/examples/< example_name >/nrfconnect/configuration/< pcb name >*" directory. 

Reviewer: Do we need this?

Author: Okay, it should be obvious, supposing a user knows how to use our examples.

> To prepare an example that support a factory data, a *pm_static* file has to contain a partition named `factory_data`, and its size should be equal to at least 4 kB and be multiple of one Flash page (for nRF52 and nRF53 boards, a single page is 4 kB size).

Reviewer: Just a thought... factory_data or maybe  mt_factory_data ?

Reviewer: I think it is fine, let's leave it as it is.. I thought about other device's factory data (not related to Matter) - but anyway someone could change it if he wants, use "user" key in our format, or name other factory partition differently.

> Below, there is an example of how to create a factory data partition in `pm_static.yml` file according to `pm_static.yml` from [lock app example](../../examples/lock-app/nrfconnect/configuration/nrf52840dk_nrf52840/pm_static_dfu.yml) and nRF52840DK board:

Reviewer: See below example to learn how to create..

To enable generating factory data set automatically go to example's directory and build an example with the following option:

```
$ west build -b nrf52840dk_nrf52840 -- -DCONFIG_CHIP_FACTORY_DATA_BUILD=y
```
or add `CONFIG_CHIP_FACTORY_DATA_BUILD=y` config to a ***prj.conf*** file.

Each factory data parameter has default value and they are described in [Kconfig file](../../config/nrfconnect/chip-module/Kconfig). Setting a new value for factory data parameter can be done in two ways - by providing it as a build argument list or by using interactive Kconfig interfaces.

### Providing factory data parameters as a build argument list

This solution of providing factory data can be used with third-party build script because it uses only one command.
All parameters can be edited manually by providing them as an additional option for the west command e.g.:

```

> $ west build -b nrf52840dk_nrf52840 -- --DCONFIG_CHIP_FACTORY_DATA_BUILD=y --DCONFIG_CHIP_DEVICE_DISCRIMINATOR=0xF11

Reviewer: Just a thought now.. do we need "_BUILD" in the KConfig name?

Reviewer 2: I requested it to distinguish it from `FACTORY_DATA_PROVIDER`, but if it causes confusion rather than helps, we can remove it :)

Author: We need it because we have two separate configs for factory data. The first one is called CHIP_FACTORY_DATA_BUILD, and it enables generating of factory data during the building. The second one is CHIP_FACTORY_DATA_ENABLED, which enables factory data support. Even if the second one will be used frequently, the first of them probably will not be used by most customers. I wanted to point out that this config is used for the building only.

Reviewer: Make sense to have additional suffix - just a word "BUILD" was not obvious for me that this generated the new image. But i guess it is well documented in the KConfig.

(0xF00) Device pairing discriminator
(20202021) Spake2+ passcode
(1000) Spake2+ iteration count
(U1BBS0UyUCBLZXkgU2FsdA==) Spake2+ salt in string format
(uWFwqugDNGiEck/po7KHwwMwwqZgN10XuyBajPGuyzUEV/iree4lOrao5GuwnlQ
(91a9c12a7c80700a31ddcfa7fce63e44) A rotating device id unique i
```

> Note: To get more information about how to use Interactive Kconfig interfaces go to [Kconfig docummentation](https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/zephyr/build/kconfig/menuconfig.html).

<hr>
<a name="Programming factory data"></a>

## Programming factory data

Ready HEX file containing factory data can be programmed into device's FLASH memory using *nrfjprog* and J-Link programmer. To do that use following command:

```
$ nrfjprog --program factory_data.hex
```

In this command a *--family* argument can be added and then provide name of board: **NRF52** for nrf52840DK or **NRF53** for nrf5340DK. E.g. 

```
$ nrfjprog --family NRF52 --program factory_data.hex
```

> Note: Go [here](https://infocenter.nordicsemi.com/index.jsp?topic=%2Fug_nrf_cltools%2FUG%2Fcltools%2Fnrf_nrfjprogexe.html) to get more information about how to use nrfjprog utility.

> Another way to program factory data to a device is to use the nrfconnect build system described in [Building an example with factory data](#building-an-example-with-factory-data), and build an example with option `--DCONFIG_CHIP_MERGE_FACTORY_DATA_WITH_FIRMWARE=y`. After that, use the following command from the example's directory to write firmware and newly generated factory data at the same time:

Reviewer: Just a thought again :D

We have already:
`CONFIG_CHIP_FACTORY_DATA_BUILD`
Could we have the same prefix, or you see it as completely different feature? E.g.:
`CONFIG_CHIP_FACTORY_DATA_MERGE_WITH_FIRMWARE`

Author: CONFIG_CHIP_FACTORY_DATA_BUILD config enables generating the factory data during building, but I guess, not everyone will want to merge it in the final merge.hex file. So actually, I added CONFIG_CHIP_FACTORY_DATA_MERGE_WITH_FIRMWARE config as an additional feature for FACTORY_DATA_BUILD.

Reviewer: Oh.. what i wanted to ask is if it makes sense to have the same "prefix".

So: `CONFIG_CHIP_MERGE_FACTORY_DATA_WITH_FIRMWARE` =>`CONFIG_CHIP_FACTORY_DATA_MERGE_WITH_FIRMWARE`

|``dac_key``|DAC private key|68 B|byte string|mandatory|The private key associated with the Device Attestation Certificate (DAC). This key should be encrypted and maximum security should be guaranteed while generating and providing it to factory data.|
|``pai_cert``|Product Attestation Intermediate|<1, 1204> B|byte string|mandatory|An intermediate certificate is an X.509 certificate, which has been signed by the root certificate. The last intermediate certificate in a chain is used to sign the leaf (the Matter device) certificate. The PAI is a DER-encoded X.509v3-compliant certificate as defined in RFC 5280.||
|``spake2_it``|SPAKE2 iteration counter|4 B|uint32|mandatory|The SPAKE2 iteration counter is associated with the ephemeral PAKE passcode verifier to be used for the commissioning. The iteration counter is used as a crypto parameter to process the SPAKE2 verifier.|

> |``spake2_salt``|SPAKE2 salt| <36, 68> B|byte string|mandatory|The SPAKE2 salt is random data that is used as an additional input to a one-way function that “hashes” data. A new salt should be randomly generated for each password.|

Reviewer 4: Why is "hashes" in quotation marks? What do you want to say here?

Author: Hmm, I don't remember. I think I found this explanation somewhere on the internet. I guess, the `to hash` verb isn't obvious but is just a mental shortcut. I realized that I shouldn't use mental shortcuts anywhere. I will rephrase this sentence. :)

- Byte string - This parameter represents the sequence of integers between ``0`` and ``255``(inclusive), without any encoding. Because the JSON format does not allow to use of byte strings, the ``hex:`` prefix is added to a parameter, and its representation is converted to a HEX string. For example, an ASCII string *abba* is represented as *hex:61626261* in the JSON file and then stored in the HEX file as *0x61626261*. The HEX string length in the JSON file is two times greater than the byte string plus the size of the prefix.
- ASCII string is a string representation in ASCII encoding without null-terminating.
- ISO 8601 format is a [date format](https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html) that represents a date given as ``YYYY-MM-DD`` or ``YYYYMMDD``.
- All certificates stored in factory data are given in the [X.509](https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-X.509-201910-I/en) format.

<hr>
<a name="Using own factory data"></a>

## Using own factory data implementation

<hr>
<a name="Generating factory data"></a>

## Generating factory data

### Creating factory data JSON file

### Verifying using the JSON Schema tool

> The JSON file that contains factory data can be verified using the [JSON Schema tool](https://github.com/project-chip/connectedhomeip/blob/master/scripts/tools/nrfconnect/nrfconnect_factory_data.schema). This tool validates the structure and contents of the JSON data. Use this tool to validate the factory data JSON file.

Reviewer 5: `JSON Schema tool` links to the shema file not the tool itself. Is that correct?

Reviewer 5: Maybe we can mention that actually there are a few online tools which do the job as well, for instance:
https://www.jsonschemavalidator.net/

Author: I think using the online tool here is not a good point, but you're right, there should be only JSON Schema because a tool is described below. I prefer using the python tool instead of online validators, but do you think it is safe and proper to add information that users can use online validators?

Reviewer 5: Well the advantage is that it does not require any pre-setup whatsoever and is easy to use. But regarding the safety and reliability of these tools I have no strong opinion. I just used them in the past quite often and did not faced any issues.

The factory data partition is an area in a device's persistent storage where a factory data set is stored. This area is configured using the [Partition Manager](https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/nrf/scripts/partition_manager/partition_manager.html), within which all partitions are declared in the ``pm_static.yml`` file.

To prepare an example that supports factory data, a *pm_static* file must contain a partition called ``factory_data``, whose size should be a multiple of one flash page (for nRF52 and nRF53 SoCs, a single page size equals 4 kB).

See the following code snippet for an example of how to create a factory data partition in the ``pm_static.yml`` file.
The snippet is based on the ``pm_static.yml`` file from the [Lock application example](../../examples/lock-app/nrfconnect/configuration/nrf52840dk_nrf52840/pm_static_dfu.yml) and uses the nRF52840 DK:

```
...
mcuboot_primary_app:
    orig_span: &id002
        - app
    span: *id002
    address: 0x7200
    size: 0xf3e00

factory_data:
    address: 0xfb00
    size: 0x1000
    region: flash_primary

settings_storage:
    address: 0xfc000
    size: 0x4000
    region: flash_primary
...
```

> In this example, a ``factory_data`` partition has been placed after the application partition (``mcuboot_primary_app`` is a container to store the application firmware that can be replaced in the Direct Firmware Update process). Its size has been set to 4 kB (``0x1000``), which corresponds to one page of the nRF52840 DK flash memory.

Reviewer 5: *Direct* Firmware Update of *Device* Firmware Update? :)

Author: device :)

> In this example, a ``factory_data`` partition has been placed after the application partition (``mcuboot_primary_app`` is a container to store the application firmware that can be replaced in the Direct Firmware Update process). Its size has been set to 4 kB (``0x1000``), which corresponds to one page of the nRF52840 DK flash memory.

Reviewer 5: "which corresponds to one page of the nRF52840 DK flash memory" - > but it's true also for the nRF53, right (I mean the size)? And is it DK of SoC specific?

Author: It is SoC specific, and you are right, nRF53 has the same page size.

- ``<partition_address_in_memory>`` is an address in the device's persistent storage area where a partition data set is to be stored.
- ``<partition_size>`` is a size of partition in the device's persistent storage area. New data is checked according to this value of the JSON data to see if it fits the size.

To see the optional arguments for the script, use the following command:

```
$ python scripts/tools/nrfconnect/nrfconnect_generate_partition.py -h
```

**Example of command for nRF52840 DK:**

```
$ python scripts/tools/nrfconnect/nrfconnect_generate_partition.py -i build/zephyr/factory_data.json -o build/zephyr/factory_data --offset 0xfb000 --size 0x1000
```

As a result, ``factory_data.hex`` and ``factory_data.bin`` files are created in the ``/build/zephyr/`` directory. The first file contains the memory offset.
For this reason, it can be programmed directly to the device using a programmer (for example, nrfjprog).

<hr>
<a name="Building an example with factory data"></a>

## Building an example with factory data

You can generate the factory data set manually using the instructions described in the [Generating factory data](#generating-factory-data) section.

> Another way is to use the nRF Connect build system that generates factory data content automatically using Kconfig options and includes the content in the final firmware binary.

Reviewer 4: Do you mean nRF Connect *platform* build system here or nRF Connect *SDK* one?

Author: I mean the nRF Connect platform build system because a script that creates factory data and the nRF Connect SDK build system are parts of the Matter build system. So I'll add a *platform* word to this sentence.

    CHIP_ERROR GetVendorName(char * buf, size_t bufSize) override;
    CHIP_ERROR GetVendorId(uint16_t & vendorId) override;
    CHIP_ERROR GetProductName(char * buf, size_t bufSize) override;
    CHIP_ERROR GetProductId(uint16_t & productId) override;
    CHIP_ERROR GetSerialNumber(char * buf, size_t bufSize) override;
    CHIP_ERROR GetManufacturingDate(uint16_t & year, uint8_t & month, uint8_t & day) override;
    CHIP_ERROR GetHardwareVersion(uint16_t & hardwareVersion) override;
    CHIP_ERROR GetHardwareVersionString(char * buf, size_t bufSize) override;
    CHIP_ERROR GetRotatingDeviceIdUniqueId(MutableByteSpan & uniqueIdSpan) override;
```

After that, put a newly created parser  and provider files to your project directory and add them to the **CMakeList.txt** file. To use own implementation of factory data parser and provider disable building both the default and nRF Connect implementations of factory data providers. To do that add ``CONFIG_FACTORY_DATA_CUSTOM_BACKEND=y`` config to your **prj.conf** file or build an example with following option (replace `nrf52840dk_nrf52840` with your board name):

```

> $ west build -b nrf52840dk_nrf52840 -- -DCONFIG_FACTORY_DATA_CUSTOM_BACKEND=y

Reviewer 2: Not `<build-target>`? I thought we switched to that

1. Navigate to *connectedhomeip* root directory.

2. Run the script with *-h* option to see all possible options:

``` 
$ python scripts/tools/nrfconnect/generate_nrfconnect_chip_factory_data.py -h
```

3. Prepare a list of arguments:

    - Fill up all mandatory arguments:
    ```
    --sn --vendor_id, --product_id, --vendor_name, --product_name, --date, --hw_ver, --hw_ver_str, --spake2_it, --spake2_salt, --discriminator
    ```

    - Add output file path:
    ```
    -o <output_dir>
    ```

    - Generate SPAKE 2 verifier:
    ```
    --passcode <pass_code> --spake2p_path <path to spake2p executable>
    ```
    or add it manually:
    ```
    --spake2_verifier <verifier>
    ```

    - Add paths to .der files containing PAI and DAC certificates and DAC private key:
    ```
    --dac_cert <path to DAC certificate>.der --dac_key <path to DAC key>.der --pai_cert <path to PAI certificate>.der
    ```

    - Add DAC private key password if needed:
    ```
    --dac_key_password <password>
    ```

    - (optional) Generate the new unique ID for rotating device ID:
    ```
    --generate_rd_uid
    ```

    or provide it:
    ```
    --rd_uid <rotating device ID unique ID>

>     ```

Author: Using the --generate_rd_uid argument automatically adds generated UID to factory data. So we don't need to provide it one more time.

    - (optional) Add JSON schema to verify JSON file:
    ```
    --schema <path to JSON Schema file>
    ```

>     - (optional) Add request to include a pairing passcode in JSON file:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - (optional) Add request to include a pairing passcode in the JSON file:
```

    ```
    --include_passcode
    ```

    - (optional) Add request to overwrite existing JSON file:
    ```
    --overwrite
    ```

> 4. Run the script using prepared list of arguments:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
4. Run the script using the prepared list of arguments:
```

```
$ python generate_nrfconnect_chip_factory_data.py <arguments>
```

For example, a final invocation of the Python script can look similar to the following one:
```
$ python scripts/tools/nrfconnect/generate_nrfconnect_chip_factory_data.py \
--sn "11223344556677889900" \
--vendor_id 65521 \
--product_id 32774 \
--vendor_name "Nordic Semiconductor ASA" \
--product_name "not-specified" \
--date "2022-02-02" \
--hw_ver 1 \
--hw_ver_str "prerelase" \
--dac_cert "credentials/development/attestation/Matter-Development-DAC-8006-Cert.der" \
--dac_key "credentials/development/attestation/Matter-Development-DAC-8006-Key.der" \
--pai_cert "credentials/development/attestation/Matter-Development-PAI-noPID-Cert.der" \
--spake2_it 1000 \
--spake2_salt "U1BBS0UyUCBLZXkgU2FsdA==" \
--discriminator 0xF00 \
--generate_rd_uid \
--passcode 20202021 \
--spake2p_path "src/tools/spake2p/out/spake2p" \
--out "build.json" \
--schema "scripts/tools/nrfconnect/nrfconnect_factory_data.schema"
```

> As the result of the above example, a unique ID for rotating device ID will be created, Spake2+ verifier will be generated using spake2p executable, and JSON file will be verified using prepared JSON Schema.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As the result of the above example, a unique ID for the rotating device ID will be created, SPAKE2+ verifier will be generated using the ``spake2p`` executable, and the JSON file will be verified using the prepared JSON Schema.
```

> If the script finishes successfully, go to the location you provided as a `-o` argument and find a created JSON file. Use this JSON file during  [generating factory data partition](#generating_factory_data_partition) process.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If the script finishes successfully, go to the location you provided with the `-o` argument. Use the JSON file you find there when [generating the factory data partition](#generating_factory_data_partition).
```

> > Note: Generating Spake2+ verifier is optional and it requires providing a path to spake2p executable. To get it navigate to the connectedhomeip root directory, run `cd src/tools/spake2p && gn gen out && ninja -C out spake2p`  in terminal to build executable and add the `connectedhomeip/src/tools/spake2p/out/spake2p` path as an argument of `--spake2p_path` for the Python script. 

Reviewer 4: I think this could work better as a subsection.

> > Note: By default overwriting the existing JSON file is disabled. That means you can not create a new JSON file with the same name in the exact location as an existing file. To allow overwriting add `--overwrite` option to arguments list for the Python script.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> Note: By default, overwriting the existing JSON file is disabled. This means that you cannot create a new JSON file with the same name in the exact location as an existing file. To allow overwriting, add the ``--overwrite`` option to the argument list of the Python script.
```

### Verifying using the JSON Schema tool

The JSON file that contains factory data can be verified using the [JSON Schema file](https://github.com/project-chip/connectedhomeip/blob/master/scripts/tools/nrfconnect/nrfconnect_factory_data.schema). There are three options to validate the structure and contents of the JSON data. The first one is to use the **php-json-schema** tool, the second one is to copy-paste contents of JSON Schema and JSON file to the dedicated website, and the last one is to use the nRF Connect Python script.

> **Option no. 1 using the php-json-schema tool** 

Reviewer 4: Make this into a #### subsection, and so the other options.

To check the JSON file using a JSON Schema verification tool manually on a Linux machine, complete the following steps:

1. Install the ``php-json-schema`` package:
```
$ sudo apt install php-json-schema
```

2. Run the following command, with ``<path_to_JSON_file>`` and ``<path_to_schema_file>`` replaced with the paths to the JSON file and the Schema file, respectively:
```
$ validate-json <path_to_JSON_f
```

The tool returns empty output in case of success.

**Option no. 2 using a website validator** 

You can also use external websites instead of the ``php-json-schema`` tool to verify a factory data JSON file. For example, go to the [JSON Schema Validator website](https://www.jsonschemavalidator.net/), copy-paste a content of the [JSON Schema file](https://github.com/project-chip/connectedhomeip/blob/master/scripts/tools/nrfconnect/nrfconnect_factory_data.schema) to the first window and a JSON file to the second one. A message below windows indicates a status of validating.

**Option no. 3 using the nRF Connect Python script** 

> You can have the JSON file be checked automatically by the Python script during its generation by providing the path to the JSON schema file as an additional argument, which should replace the ``<path_to_schema>`` variable in the following command:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can have the JSON file be checked automatically by the Python script during the file generation.
For this to happen, provide the path to the JSON schema file as an additional argument, which should replace the ``<path_to_schema>`` variable in the following command:
```

|``dac_cert``|(DAC) Device Attestation Certificate|<1, 602> B|byte string|mandatory|The Device Attestation Certificate (DAC) and the corresponding private key are unique to each Matter device. The DAC is used for the Device Attestation process and to perform commissioning into a fabric. The DAC is a DER-encoded X.509v3-compliant certificate, as defined in RFC 5280.|
|``dac_key``|DAC private key|68 B|byte string|mandatory|The private key associated with the Device Attestation Certificate (DAC). This key should be encrypted and maximum security should be guaranteed while generating and providing it to factory data.|
|``pai_cert``|Product Attestation Intermediate|<1, 602> B|byte string|mandatory|An intermediate certificate is an X.509 certificate, which has been signed by the root certificate. The last intermediate certificate in a chain is used to sign the leaf (the Matter device) certificate. The PAI is a DER-encoded X.509v3-compliant certificate as defined in RFC 5280.||

> |``spake2_it``|SPAKE2 iteration counter|4 B|uint32|mandatory|The SPAKE2 iteration counter is associated with the ephemeral PAKE passcode verifier to be used for the commissioning. The iteration counter is used as a crypto parameter to process the SPAKE2 verifier.|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|``spake2_it``|SPAKE2 iteration count|4 B|uint32|mandatory|The SPAKE2 iteration count is associated with the ephemeral PAKE passcode verifier to be used for the commissioning. The iteration count is used as a crypto parameter to generate the SPAKE2 verifier.|
```
Also, I'm not sure I understand the part about ephemeral PAKE passcode. The passcode is fixed per device, so the word "ephemeral" may be misleading.

Author: Ok, I see. I took it from the spec, but there is no context, so the word "ephemeral" is misleading.

- ASCII string is a string representation in ASCII encoding without null-terminating.
- ISO 8601 format is a [date format](https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html) that represents a date given as ``YYYY-MM-DD`` or ``YYYYMMDD``.
- All certificates stored in factory data are given in the [X.509](https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-X.509-201910-I/en) format.

<hr>
<a name="Using own factory data"></a>

## Using own factory data implementation

The example of a factory data generation process shown in the [generating factory data](#generating-factory-data) section is only the nRF Connect platform proposition. Nothing stands in the way of creating a HEX file containing all [factory data components](#factory-data-components) in any format and then implementing a parser to read out all parameters and pass them to a provider. Each manufacturer can implement a factory data set in its way by implementing a parser and a factory data accessor inside the Matter stack. The [nRF Connect Provider](../../src/platform/nrfconnect/FactoryDataProvider.h) and [FactoryDataParser](../../src/platform/nrfconnect/FactoryDataParser.h) can be used as an example to create other ones locally.  

> In the nRF Connect example the FactoryDataProvider is a template class that inherits from **DeviceAttestationCredentialsProvider**, **CommissionableDataProvider** and **DeviceInstanceInfoProvider** classes. Another implementation must also inherit from these classes and implement their functions to get all factory data parameters from the device's Flash memory. These classes are purely virtual and need to be overridden by the derived class. To do that, override all the following methods:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the nRF Connect example the FactoryDataProvider is a template class that inherits from **DeviceAttestationCredentialsProvider**, **CommissionableDataProvider** and **DeviceInstanceInfoProvider** classes. Another implementation must also inherit from these classes and implement their functions to get all factory data parameters from the device's flash memory. These classes are purely virtual and need to be overridden by the derived class. To do that, override all the following methods:
```

    CHIP_ERROR GetVendorId(uint16_t & vendorId) override;
    CHIP_ERROR GetProductName(char * buf, size_t bufSize) override;
    CHIP_ERROR GetProductId(uint16_t & productId) override;
    CHIP_ERROR GetSerialNumber(char * buf, size_t bufSize) override;
    CHIP_ERROR GetManufacturingDate(uint16_t & year, uint8_t & month, uint8_t & day) override;
    CHIP_ERROR GetHardwareVersion(uint16_t & hardwareVersion) override;
    CHIP_ERROR GetHardwareVersionString(char * buf, size_t bufSize) override;
    CHIP_ERROR GetRotatingDeviceIdUniqueId(MutableByteSpan & uniqueIdSpan) override;
```

You can read the factory data set from the device's Flash memory in different ways depending on purpose and format. In the nRF Connect example, the factory data is stored in CBOR format. Then a device uses the [Factory Data Parser](../../src/platform/nrfconnect/FactoryDataParser.h) to read out raw data, decode them, and store them in the `FactoryData` structure. The [Factor Data Provider](../../src/platform/nrfconnect/FactoryDataProvider.c) implementation uses this parser to get all needed factory data parameters and provide them to the Matter core.

> The last thing to do is add a newly created parser and accessor to the build system by replacing the default ones. To do that, we recommend putting new implementations into *connectedhomeip-root/src/platform/nrfconnect* directory, editing the [BUILD.gn](../../src/platform/nrfconnect/BUILD.gn), finding out section:

Reviewer 2: I think a user shouldn't be required to modify the core source files. They can just add their parser/accessor to their project. Also, Kamil has added FACTORY_DATA_CUSTOM_BACKEND (IIRC) that can be used to disable building both the default and our implementations, so we can recommend setting it.

Author: Ok, I missed the FACTORY_DATA_CUSTOM_BACKEND config meaning. Now it seems to be easier to explain it. :)

```
  if (chip_enable_factory_data) {
    sources += [
      "FactoryDataParser.c",
      "FactoryDataParser.h",
      "FactoryDataProvider.cpp",
      "FactoryDataProvider.h",
    ]
  }
``` 
And replacing existing `sources` with own file names.

<hr>
<a name="Generating factory data"></a>

## Enabling factory data support

By default, factory data support is disabled in all nRF Connect examples. An nRF Connect device uses pre-defined parameters from Matter Core, which the user should not change. To start using factory data stored in the Flash memory and use the nRF Connect **Factory Data Provider** build an example with following option (replace `nrf52840dk_nrf52840` with your board name):

```
$ west build -b nrf52840dk_nrf52840 -- -DCONFIG_CHIP_FACTORY_DATA=y
```

## Generating factory data

> This section is an example of generating factory data using two nRF Connect python scripts. The first one allows creating a JSON file containing a user-friendly representation of factory data. The second one uses a previously created JSON file to create a factory data partition and save it to a Hex file. After these operations, program a hex file containing factory data partition into the device's Flash memory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section is an example of generating factory data using two nRF Connect Python scripts. The first one allows creating a JSON file containing a user-friendly representation of factory data. The second one uses a previously created JSON file to create a factory data partition and save it to a HEX file. After these operations, program a hex file containing factory data partition into the device's flash memory.
```
or am I wrong and we should capitalize "Flash" @greg-fer?

Reviewer 4: No no, we should not.

You can use the second script without invoking the first one by providing a JSON file written in another way. To ensure that the JSON file is correct and the device will be able to read out parameters, verify it using [a JSON schema](#verifying-using-a-json-schema).

### Creating factory data JSON file

> A Matter device needs a proper factory data partition stored in the Flash memory to read out all demand parameters during startup. Unfortunately, a device's binary format is not human-friendly and hard to check thoroughly. To simplify factory data generation, you can use the [nRFconnect python script](../../scripts/tools/nrfconnect/generate_nrfconnect_chip_factory_data.py) to provide all needed parameters and generate a human-readable JSON file.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Matter device needs a proper factory data partition stored in the Flash memory to read out all required parameters during startup. Unfortunately, the binary format is not human-friendly and hard to check thoroughly. To simplify factory data generation, you can use the [nRFconnect python script](../../scripts/tools/nrfconnect/generate_nrfconnect_chip_factory_data.py) to provide all needed parameters and generate a human-readable JSON file.  
```

--sn "11223344556677889900" \
--vendor_id 65521 \
--product_id 32774 \
--vendor_name "Nordic Semiconductor ASA" \
--product_name "not-specified" \
--date "2022-02-02" \
--hw_ver 1 \
--hw_ver_str "prerelase" \
--dac_cert "credentials/development/attestation/Matter-Development-DAC-8006-Cert.der" \
--dac_key "credentials/development/attestation/Matter-Development-DAC-8006-Key.der" \
--pai_cert "credentials/development/attestation/Matter-Development-PAI-noPID-Cert.der" \
--spake2_it 1000 \
--spake2_salt "U1BBS0UyUCBLZXkgU2FsdA==" \
--discriminator 0xF00 \
--generate_rd_uid \
--passcode 20202021 \
--spake2p_path "src/tools/spake2p/out/spake2p" \
--out "build.json" \
--schema "scripts/tools/nrfconnect/nrfconnect_factory_data.schema"
```

As the result of the above example, a unique ID for rotating device ID will be created, SPAKE2 verifier will be generated using spake2p executable, and JSON file will be verified using prepared JSON Schema.

If the script finishes successfully, go to the location you provided as a `-o` argument and find a created JSON file. Use this JSON file during  [generating factory data partition](#generating_factory_data_partition) process.

> > Note: Generating SPAKE2 verifier is optional and it required providing spake2p executable. To get it navigate to the connectedhomeip root directory, run `cd src/tools/spake2p && gn gen out && ninja -C out spake2p`  in terminal to build executable and add the `connectedhomeip/src/tools/spake2p/out/spake2p` path as an argument `--spake2p_path` for the python script. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Note: Generating SPAKE2 verifier is optional and it requires providing a path to spake2p executable. To get it navigate to the connectedhomeip root directory, run `cd src/tools/spake2p && gn gen out && ninja -C out spake2p`  in terminal to build executable and add the `connectedhomeip/src/tools/spake2p/out/spake2p` path as an argument of `--spake2p_path` for the python script. 
```

```

  external_flash (0x800000 - 8192kB):
+---------------------------------------------+
| 0x0: mcuboot_secondary (0xf4000 - 976kB)    |
| 0xf4000: external_flash (0x70c000 - 7216kB) |
+---------------------------------------------+

  flash_primary (0x100000 - 1024kB):
+-------------------------------------------------+
| 0x0: mcuboot (0x7000 - 28kB)                    |
+---0x7000: mcuboot_primary (0xf4000 - 976kB)-----+
| 0x7000: mcuboot_pad (0x200 - 512B)              |
+---0x7200: mcuboot_primary_app (0xf3e00 - 975kB)-+
| 0x7200: app (0xf3e00 - 975kB)                   |
+-------------------------------------------------+
| 0xfb000: factory_data (0x1000 - 4kB)            |
| 0xfc000: settings_storage (0x4000 - 16kB)       |
+-------------------------------------------------+

  sram_primary (0x40000 - 256kB):
+--------------------------------------------+
| 0x20000000: sram_primary (0x40000 - 256kB) |
+--------------------------------------------+

```

### Generating factory data partition

To store the factory data set in the device's persistent storage, convert the data from the JSON file to its binary representation in the CBOR format.

> To do this, use the [nRF Connect script](../../scripts/tools/nrfconnect/nrfconnect_generate_partition.py) to generate factory data partition.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To do this, use [nrfconnect_generate_partition.py](../../scripts/tools/nrfconnect/nrfconnect_generate_partition.py) to generate factory data partition.
```
I think using specific script names rather than "nRF Connect script" would be more readable.

> To generate the factory data partition using the [nRF Connect script](../../scripts/tools/nrfconnect/nrfconnect_generate_partition.py), navigate to the *connectedhomeip* root directory and run the following command pattern:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To generate the factory data partition using the [nrfconnect_generate_partition.py](../../scripts/tools/nrfconnect/nrfconnect_generate_partition.py), navigate to the *connectedhomeip* root directory and run the following command pattern:
```

<hr>
<a name="Generating factory data"></a>

## Enabling factory data support

> By default, factory data support is disabled in all nRF Connect examples. An nRF Connect device uses pre-defined parameters from Matter Core, which the user should not change. To start using factory data stored in the Flash memory and use the nRF Connect **Factory Data Provider** build an example with following option (replace `nrf52840dk_nrf52840` with your board name):

Author: As nRF Connect device I mean the device that uses our SoCs, and works based on nRF Connect platform code. 

According to pre-defined parameters, in the Matter repository there are some .h and .cpp files containing all mocked factory data parameters that are used instead of real factory data. I think user shouldn't edit Matter core so I guess these parameters shouldn't be changed. Our factory data parameters are saved in kConfigs, that users can change. But users may want to create factory data in own way, and we decided to agree with that, but both default parameters and our implementation must be disabled. But maybe, you're right, maybe I used wrong words here and there are some misunderstandings.
